Acacia: A very unusual wand wood which created tricky wands that often refused to produce magic for any but their owner, and also withheld their best effects from all but those most gifted. This sensitivity rendered them difficult to place, and Garrick Ollivander kept only a small stock for those witches or wizards of sufficient subtlety, for acacia was not suited to what was commonly known as 'bangs-and-smells' magic. When well-matched, an acacia wand matched any for power, though it was often underrated due to the peculiarity of its temperament. Acacia wands were not used often, as in the wrong hands it would either be overpowered or extremely weak.
Alder: Alder was an unyielding wood. Garrick Ollivander had discovered that its ideal owner was not stubborn or obstinate, but often helpful, considerate and most likeable. Whereas most wand woods sought similarity in the characters of those they would best serve, alder was unusual in that it seemed to desire a nature that was, if not precisely opposite to its own, certainly of a markedly different type. When an alder wand was happily placed, it became a magnificent, loyal helpmate. Of all wand types, alder was best suited to non-verbal spell work, whence came its reputation for being suitable only for the most advanced witches and wizards.
Apple: Applewood wands were not made in great numbers. They were powerful and best suited to an owner of high aims and ideals, as this wood mixed poorly with Dark magic.
Ash: Ash wands cleaved to its one true master and ought not to be passed on or gifted from the original owner, because it would lose power and skill. This tendency was extreme if the core was of unicorn hair. Those witches and wizards best suited to ash wands were not lightly swayed from their beliefs or purposes. However, the brash or over-confident witch or wizard, who often insisted of trying wands on this prestigious wood, would be disappointed by its effects. The ideal owner might be stubborn, and would certainly be courageous, but never crass or arrogant.
Aspen: The proper owner of the aspen wand was often an accomplished duellist or destined to be so, for the aspen wand was one of those particularly suited to martial magic. An infamous and secretive eighteenth-century duelling club, which called itself the Silver Spears, was reputed to admit only those who owned aspen wands.
Beech: The true match for a beech wand would be, if young, wise beyond his or her years, and if full-grown, rich in understanding and experience. Beech wands performed very weakly for the narrow-minded and intolerant. When properly matched, the beech wand was capable of a subtlety and artistry not seen in any other wood, hence its lustrous reputation.
Birch: Though Garrick Ollivander himself did not use it, his associate in the Hogsmeade branch was known to sell wands made from birch.
Blackthorn: Blackthorn wands, which was a very unusual wand wood, had the reputation, in Garrick Ollivander's well-merited opinion, of being best suited to a warrior. These wands appeared to need to pass through danger or hardship with their owners to become truly bonded. Given this condition, the blackthorn wand would become as loyal and faithful a servant as one could wish.
Black Walnut: Less common than the standard walnut wand, that of black walnut sought a master of good instincts and powerful insight. Black walnut was a very handsome wood, but not the easiest to master. Paired with a sincere, self-aware owner, however, it became one of the most loyal and impressive wands of all, with a particular flair in all kinds of charmwork.
Cedar: The cedar wand found its perfect home where there were perspicacity and perception. Something that went against Slughorn's personality, as he was not particularly perceptive. The witch or wizard who was well-matched with cedar carried the potential to be a frightening adversary, which often came as a shock to those who had thoughtlessly challenged them.
Cherry: Cherry wood was a highly praised and sought after wood among Mahoutokoro students in Japan. This wand was considered expensive, possibly because of the wood it was made out of.
Chestnut: This wand had a second master in the form of Ron Weasley after it was taken from Pettigrew during the Skirmish at Malfoy Manor. Chestnut wands preferred witches and wizards who were skilled tamers of magical beasts, those who possessed great gifts in Herbology, and those who were natural fliers.
Cypress: Cypress wands were said to be well-matched to wizards who were self-sacrificing and willing to die a heroic death.
Dogwood: Dogwood wands were quirky and mischievous; they had playful natures and insisted upon partners who could provide them with scope for excitement and fun. It would be quite wrong, however, to deduce from this that dogwood wands were not capable of serious magic when called upon to do so; they had been known to perform outstanding spells under difficult conditions, and when paired with a suitably clever and ingenious witch or wizard, could produce dazzling enchantments. Dogwood wands refused to perform non-verbal spells and they were often rather noisy.
Ebony: Ebony wands had an impressive appearance and reputation, being highly suited to all manner of combative magic, and to Transfiguration. Ebony was happiest in the hand of those with the courage to be themselves. Frequently non-conformist, highly individual or comfortable with the status of outsider. In the experience of Garrick Ollivander, the ebony wand's perfect match was one who would hold fast to their beliefs, no matter what the external pressure, and would not be swayed lightly from their purpose.
Elder: Elder was the rarest wand wood of all and reputed to be deeply unlucky, and elder wands were trickier to master than any other. They contained powerful magic, but scorned to remain with an owner who was not the superior of their company; it took a remarkable wizard to keep an elder wand for any length of time. Only a highly unusual person would find their perfect match in the elder, and on the rare occasion when such a pairing occurred, it might be taken as certain that the witch or wizard in question was marked out for a special destiny.
Elm: Elm wands preferred owners with presence, magical dexterity and a certain native dignity. Of all wand woods, elm, in Ollivander's experience, produced the fewest accidents, the least foolish errors, and the most elegant charms and spells; these were sophisticated wands, capable of highly advanced magic in the right hands (which made it highly desirable to those who espoused the pure-blood philosophy).
English oak: A wand for good times and bad, this was a friend as loyal as the wizard who deserved it. Wands of English oak demanded partners of strength, courage, and fidelity.
Fir: Fir wands demanded staying power and strength of purpose in their true owners, and that they were poor tools in the hands of the changeable and indecisive. Fir wands were particularly suited to Transfiguration, and favoured owners of focused, strong-minded and, occasionally, intimidating demeanour. Fir wands were called 'the survivor's wand'.
Hawthorn: Hawthorn wands might be particularly suited to healing magic, but they were also adept at curses, and it had been generally observed that the hawthorn wand seemed most at home with a conflicted nature, or with a witch or wizard passing through a period of turmoil. Hawthorn was not easy to master, however, and one should only ever consider placing a hawthorn wand in the hands of a witch or wizard of proven talent.
Hazel: Hazel wands often reflected its owner's emotional state and worked best for a master who understood and could manage their own feelings. Others should be very careful handling a hazel wand if its owner had recently lost their temper, or suffered a serious disappointment because the wand would absorb such energy and discharge it unpredictably. It was capable of outstanding magic in the hands of the skilful and was so devoted to its owner that it often 'wilted' at the end of their master's life. Hazel wands also had the unique ability to detect water underground and would emit silvery, tear-shaped puffs of smoke if passing over concealed springs and wells.
Holly: Holly wands worked most happily for those who might need help overcoming a tendency to anger and impetuosity. At the same time, holly wands often chose owners who were engaged in some dangerous and often spiritual quest.
Hornbeam: Hornbeam selected for its life mate the talented witch or wizard with a single, pure passion, which some might call obsession - more kindly - vision, which would almost always be realised. Hornbeam wands adapted more quickly than almost any other to their owner's style of magic and would become so personalised, so quickly, that other people would find them extremely difficult to use even for the most simple of spells. Hornbeam wands likewise absorbed their owner's code of honour, whatever that might be, and would refuse to perform acts - whether for good or ill - that did not tally with their master's principles. A particularly fine-tuned and sentient wand.
Ivy: Though Garrick Ollivander himself did not use it, his associate in the Hogsmeade branch was known to sell wands made from ivy.
Larch: Larch wands had a reputation for instilling confidence and courage in the user. The celebrated wandmaker Garrick Ollivander found that larch always created wands of hidden talents and unexpected effects, which likewise described the master who deserved it. It was often the case that the witch or wizard who belonged to the larch wand might never realise the full extent of their considerable talents until paired with it, but that they would then make an exceptional match.
Laurel: It was said that a laurel wand couldn't perform a dishonourable act, although, in the quest for glory (a not uncommon goal for those best suited to these wands), laurel wands had been known to perform powerful and sometimes lethal magic.[3]
Mahogany: James Potter I's wand was described by Ollivander as "pliable and excellent for transfiguration", also having "a little more power" than Lily Evans's wand.
Maple: Their ideal owners were nature travellers and explorers; they were not stay-at-home wands and preferred ambition in their witch or wizard, otherwise, their magic grew heavy and lacklustre. Fresh challenges and regular changes of scene caused this wand to literally shine, burnishing itself as it grew, with its partner, inability, and status.
Pear: Pear trees produced wands of splendid magical powers. Possessors of pear wands were, in the experience of the learned wandmaker Garrick Ollivander, usually popular and well-respected and he never knew of a single instance where a pear wand had been discovered in the possession of a Dark Witch or Wizard. They were also the most resilient.
Pine: Pine wands always chose an independent, individual master who might be perceived as a loner, intriguing and perhaps mysterious. Pine wands enjoyed being used creatively, and unlike some others, would adapt unprotestingly to new methods and spells. Many wandmakers insisted that pine wands were able to detect, and perform best for, owners who were destined for long lives, including Garrick Ollivander who had never personally known the master of a pine wand to die young. The pine wand was one of those that were most sensitive to non-verbal magic.
Poplar: Poplar wands relied upon consistency, strength and uniform power, and were always the happiest when working with a witch or wizard of clear moral vision. The existence of these wands and its owners was cited as evidence against a myth that poplar wands never chose politicians.
Red oak: The true match for a red oak wand was possessed of unusually fast reactions, making it a perfect duelling wand. Less common than the English oak, its ideal master was light of touch, quick-witted and adaptable, often the creator of distinctive spells, and good person to have beside in a fight. Red oak wands were, in Ollivander's opinion, among the most handsome.
Redwood: Redwood wands were strongly attracted to witches and wizards who already possessed the admirable ability to fall on their feet, to make the right choice, to snatch advantage from catastrophe.
Reed: Though Garrick Ollivander himself did not use it, his associate in the Hogsmeade branch was known to sell wands made from reed. Corresponded to one of the months of the Celtic calendar, from 28 October to 24 November.[4]
Rowan: Rowan wands generally produced powerful, hard-to-break Defensive Charms. Rowan wands were also noted for its believed disassociation with the Dark Arts. Perhaps for these reasons, Rowan had become associated with pure-hearted wizards, though Ollivander noted that Rowan wands could also match and even outperform others in duels.
Silver lime: According to Pottermore, silver lime was an incredibly unusual and attractive wood that worked best for Seers and those skilled at Legilimency. It was greatly in vogue in the nineteenth century when the demand outstripped supply, causing some wandmakers to dye other wood in an effort to fool purchasers into believing they had purchased a silver lime wand.
Spruce: Spruce wands required particular deftness to work with spruce, which produced wands that were ill-matched with cautious or nervous natures, becoming positively dangerous in fumbling fingers. Spruce wands required a firm hand because it often appeared to have its own ideas about what magic it ought to be called upon to produce. However, when a spruce wand met its match, who was a bold spell-caster with a good sense of humour, it became a superb helper, intensely loyal to their owners and capable of producing particularly flamboyant and dramatic effects.
Sugar Maple: Its wood was known for wand-making in the United States.
Swamp mayhaw: According to Pottermore, Violetta Beauvais, a wandmaker from New Orleans, used the wood for all of her wands.[5]
Sycamore: The sycamore made a questing wand, eager for new experience and losing brilliance if engaged in mundane activities. It was a quirk of these handsome wands that they might combust if allowed to become 'bored', and many witches and wizards, settling down into middle age, were disconcerted to find their trusty wand bursting into flame in their hand as they asked it, one more time, to fetch their slippers. As may be deduced, the sycamore's ideal owner was curious, vital and adventurous, and when paired with such an owner, it demonstrated a capacity to learn and adapt that earned it a rightful place among the world's most highly-prized wand woods.
Tamarack: Its wood was known for wand making in the United States.
Vine: Vine wands were among the less common types, and their ideal owners were nearly always those witches or wizards who sought a greater purpose, who had a vision beyond the ordinary and who frequently astounded those who thought they knew them best. Vine wands seemed strongly attracted by personalities with hidden depths, and Garrick Ollivander himself had found them more sensitive than any other when it came to instantly detect a prospective match.
Walnut: Walnut wands were often found in the hands of magical innovators and inventors; this was a handsome wood possessed of unusual versatility and adaptability. Walnut wands would, once subjugated, perform any task its owner desired, provided that the user was of sufficient brilliance. This made for a truly lethal weapon in the hands of a witch or wizard of no conscience, for the wand and the wizard might feed on each other in a particularly unhealthy manner.
Willow: Willow was an uncommon wand wood with healing power, and their ideal owner often had some (usually unwarranted) insecurity, however well they might try and hide it. They had a handsome appearance and well-founded reputation for enabling advanced, non-verbal magic. The willow wands there had consistently selected those of greatest potential, rather than those who felt they had little to learn.
Yew: Yew wands were among the rarer kinds, and their ideal matches were likewise unusual and occasionally notorious. The wand of yew was reputed to endow its possessor with the power of life and death, which might, of course, be said of all wands; and yet yew retained a particularly dark and fearsome reputation in the spheres of duelling and all curses. However, it is untrue to say (as those unlearned in wandlore often did) that those who used yew wands were more likely to be attracted to the Dark Arts than another. The witch or wizard best suited to a yew wand might equally prove a fierce protector of others. Wands hewn from these most long-lived trees had been found in the possession of heroes quite as often as of villains. Where wizards had been buried with wands of yew, the wand generally sprouted into a tree guarding the dead owner's grave. What was certain, in Ollivander's experience, was that the yew wand never chose either a mediocre or a timid owner.